I had it from February 28th of 61, the day the
decision came down, until May Day of 61. And
the moment that the court decision came down, Carl
Braden and I, a companion case from Louisville,
Kentucky, went from ordinary citizens to become
national
figures.
The New York Times, for example, the day after this
came down, ran three full pages on the majority and
minority opinions. I got back to L.A. and was
invited to speak at Berkeley. I get up there,
there's 5,000 people, 5,000 in New York.
Princeton's Wig Clio, the Northwestern
University Journalism Department, the
Yale University made Carl May the guest of honor at
the law school, and the moot court arguments on our
case. That happened. And as these things
happened, these press releases were funneled
back to Hoover. We now have the record from the
agents of the field to Hoover. Wilkinson spoke in
Colorado Springs yesterday. There were 2,000
people. That And Hoover writes across the bottom,
when is this going to end? And somebody writes,
contacts him and says, they have another appeal.
Hoover writes, see blank in the Supreme Court and
ask when this is over. When will they be jailed? And
we don't know who blank was in the Supreme Court.
and the report came back, the ACID was followed,
filed one more appeal, they'll have at least until
May 1st,
and Hoover writes, expedite this in every way you
can.
Now that is the atmosphere in which we went to jail.
Exactly. And you have a Jack Kennedy who was
gutless and feared, feared Hoover, who was the
most, what's the word, profligate,
sex active president we've ever had. All this was
being taped by Hoover just as much as he was taping
Martin King's sex. And these things were all
there. And then you gotta go back to the principles
of the Kennedys. Bobby Kennedy was on the
McClellan Committee. Yeah. And did, violated all
lawyer-client privileges between Jimmy Hoffa
and his lawyers. They have a bad record. Yeah, I
know. And yet, the image of this young, youthful,
bright, what's the, what's the Shakespearean
word? Vigor. The, you know, the Shakespearean
Camelot atmosphere, that's a lot of bunk. At any
rate,
to wind up this point, the Citizens Committee to
Preserve American Freedoms lasted from 1952
until it was dissolved in 1960, and dissolved in
1960 because the ideas we'd proved at the local
level
were to go national, and four very prominent
national leaders decided to form a new committee
and hire me as director and put an umbrella over me.
One was Alexander Micklejohn, the former
president of Brown and Wisconsin and foremost
constitutional philosopher of this century. and
who received the Presidential Medal of Freedom,
by the way, from Kennedy in 64. No, 62. 62.
And he died in 63. No, he died after he was 63,
because he awarded it. He died when Lyndon Johnson
actually gave him the medal. That was the time when
the Presidential Medal of Freedom meant
something, before they started giving it to him.
Frank Sinatra for Whitaker Chambers. Yeah, I
know. Amazing. Mikkel John was the philosophical
giant. He is the one that reached my conscience
from probably 1952 to 1955 or 1956. I had no sharp
First Amendment
basis for my ethics. If the Un-American
Activities Committee had gone after maybe
somebody on the far right. I might not have fought
as hard. In 1955, Michael John testified before
the Hennings Committee of the United States
Senate, in which he spelled out the limits of free
speech. It's a wonderful testimony, a very brief
essay, and I read it. And we invited him to one of our
meetings where we were defending the foreign
born, some religious leaders in LA. And I heard
him. He was then 85 when I first met him. And he
completely turned my life around. In fact, I said
when I met him, if I ever get a subpoena from UAC
myself, I'll go to jail on the First Amendment if
necessary. And that was literally said by me in 56.
The other person was Aubrey Williams. Aubrey
Williams was the director of the National Youth
Administration.
He was the head of the WPA under Harry Hopkins. He
and Harry Hopkins and A. Philip Randolph, through
Eleanor Roosevelt, were able to get a wartime FEBC
ordinance through, through Roosevelt.
Aubrey was a social worker from Montgomery,
Alabama, educated at the University of Wisconsin
at Madison. He was an extreme bread baiter. He was
caught up in the Cold War as much as anybody I've
ever known. Very significant. Because toward the
end of his life, he himself was called before the
Eastland Committee at the time that Eastland was
trying to put the red label on Aubrey's next-door
neighbor, Virginia Dewar, who in turn was the
sister-in-law of Hugo Black.
Aubrey began learning in the early 50s, and when he
got out of the WPA and Roosevelt put him in to be head
of rural electrification, he could not get
confirmed because of the red-braiding
atmosphere in the country.
Aubrey, while he was head of the WPA, would fire
somebody on the rumor that they were communists.
By 1960, he hired me, at a time when I would not
answer the question anymore. And I remember so
well, we're starting this thing out, He said, I
want to get some prominent politicians. I don't
trust Jimmy Roosevelt. He's no good. I'd already
had bad experience with Jimmy. So he said, I think
Chet Holifield would be a good person to be one of
the co-chairs of this committee with me. So he went
to see Chet Holifield, who was the congressperson
from Montebello, California, later to become the
head of the Atomic Energy subcommittees in the
House. And apparently, John Olivefield, who I had
known very well in the housing days, in fact, he
came to me and I hired his daughter to get her a job
when she was a student. But by 1960, Olivefield
said that he would do it, but only if I would say I
wasn't a communist.
In other words, he was giving me the true loyalty
oath. Aubrey wrote me that I got Chet today. He's
willing. All I need from you is a brief statement
saying you're not a communist. He sent it to me in
L.A. And I figured this is more of the same stuff I'd
seen from 48 forward. And I wrote back to Aubrey a
two-page letter saying, Aubrey, you know, I've
I'm not going to answer this question to Chet or
anyone else. I've been through too much. I'm going
to jail on this issue probably within another
year. I'm not going to start answering it away from
the committee for the convenience of a politician
like Chet Holifield. Aubrey writes back my
special delivery, and we used to use that kind of
mail, saying, Frank, I see, I know your
principles, I know you won't answer. but I see in
the second paragraph on the second page that you
really are telling me you're not a communist." And
I sit down, I write a special delivery back to
Aubrey saying, there's nothing in the second page
in the second paragraph that tells you any more
than Chet, the answer to that question. So Aubrey
sends a telegram back, to hell with Chet, let's go.
And from then on, we never had the loyalty test
within the Committee to Abolish UAC, and we had
hundreds of supporters, and people from people
who were very radical and probably were communist
to people who were anti-communist. We just
refused to have a political litmus test in our own
program to get rid of UAC. Sure. That's what ACNU
was doing, it's what ADA was doing, it's what The
NAACP were doing the all, you signed up at ACNU at
that time. Yeah. You had this where you're not a
member of a communist, totalitarian, what about
the organization. The third person in this group,
these names are important, to each play a function
on our success. Mikkel John is the moral leader.
He's the philosopher. He is the purist and the
absolutist on the First Amendment. He's the one
who taught me absolutism on the first. Aubrey is
the practical wheeler-dealer, Harry Hopkins,
who knows how to get things done in Washington. He
often told me he only made one mistake in his life.
He said, that's when I hired, I was looking for an
N.Y.A. director in Texas. I heard about this
fellow, a teacher out at San Marcos School, and I
hired him. And then he went on to be president, and
I'm sorry ever since. He told me that just before he
died in the midst of the Vietnam War. Third person
was Clarence Pickett of the Quakers, the American
Friends Service Committee, who was the
nonviolent, pacifist, loving type. So our
campaigns were never, there was no rhetoric, no
nailing-to-the-wall rhetoric in our campaign.
It was all solid, principled, First Amendment,
constitutional arguments. No mean stuff. No mean
stuff, no anger in our movement. The fourth guy is
an unbelievable character. They're all dead.
He's a retired Wall Street banker from
Wandsville, New Jersey. His wife's
father, uncle, brother are all state Supreme
Court judges. But in 1948, this guy left Wall
Street, had a good sum of money, retired next to the
Lawrenceville School there outside of
Princeton, and got involved with Henry Wallace,
and ran for U.S. Senator from New Jersey on the
Progressive Ticket, and that nailed him to the
ground. From then on, he was worse than the
ordinary garden bride. He was a Henry Wallace
communist. These four men hired me. And that's
where the campaign started. It took us 15 years,
from 1960 to 1975, before we finally abolished the
committee. We now know, from the FBI record, in our
damage section of our lawsuit, although we're not
any longer seeking substantive damages, but we
would be able to prove, I think, that we could have
abolished UAC in five years if the Un-American
Activities Committee had left us alone, if the,
not only Un-American, if the FBI had left us alone
and let us go into the marketplace and just settle
our arguments without having the FBI coming in to
disrupt and poison the atmosphere around us. How
did the FBI work on poisoning the atmosphere? Did
they send in agents who would get agitators to go to
your meetings and whip up the crowd, or did they
hand out leaflets, or did they make charges
against you that appeared in the press
mysteriously, or what were the tactics that they
used? you know enough about the record to have
listed the four major categories. The FBI
concentrated, you know, you have to realize that
our file is as tall as a seven story building. And
they,
I've got my first 4,500 pages, a little pile in that
picture there. In that pile alone, The FBI reports
their success in getting 46 of my meetings
canceled by going ahead of me to a community to try
to get people who invited me to withdraw and
cancel. They had me banned in Wisconsin, in
Minnesota, in Ohio State, at the University of
North Carolina,
in Michigan State.
All of these things, I never, never dreamed it was
the FBI. I said over and over again, we're living in
a McCarthy atmosphere. You have to understand
that people are frightened and fearful. And
that's what happens. And every time they did ban
me, we just turned it around to our advantage. And
they banned me at the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill.
I was speaking the night before in Manhattan,
Connecticut, a little town in Connecticut, at a
house meeting. In the middle of my meeting, there
were twelve people in the living room. There was a
phone call that came through person-to-person
collect for me from Durham, from students in Duke
Law School, wanting to know if I'd be willing to
speak at Duke Law School tomorrow. I said, no, I'd
love to, but I'm speaking at Chapel Hill. you know,
20 miles down the road. And they said, oh, no,
you're not. You've just been banned. Governor Dan
Moore has banned you. I said, well, I don't know
anything about this. They said, well, you better
take our word for it. We want to make you the guest of
honor at Duke Law School tomorrow at the time
you're supposed to speak at Chapel Hill and are
banned. I said, well, if this is the situation,
talk to, and I named a law professor that I knew at
Duke. And when I get down there, when I arrive,
we'll talk about it. When I got there, I had been
banned, so I went to Duke. They had a packed
auditorium in the Duke Law School. Twenty-five
television stations covered it. Then we went in a
caravan up to Chapel Hill, and the students at
Chapel Hill had put a long streamer along a little
two-foot-high wall on the sidewalk in the main
town, calling it Governor Dan Moore's Wall. And
they arranged for me to stand on the sidewalk and
speak over the top of the sidewalk to 2,000
students. And then from there to the Wesley
Foundation and the Hillel Foundation and to the
Newman Club, I spoke to thousands and thousands of
people. If I'd gone down there alone, I probably
would have hit 35 students. So you could turn, in
other words, you know that the FBI got a hold of the
governor and put the pressure on him, and so he put
pressure on UNC, the president at UNC, and so the
president at UNC banned it, and what that did is you
worked it to your advantage. Well, but not because
I knew about the FBI. Right. I turned McCarthyism,
as I understood it, to my advantage. Fight back.
Now, I mentioned 5,000 students turning out at my
first meeting when the decision came down in 1961
at Berkeley. What really happened at Berkeley, I
learned two
years ago. The FBI was responsible for that mass
meeting. I was home in Los Angeles. I got a call from
a couple of students saying there was an
organization called COPE, or something like
that. I guess that's the word. SCOPE, or the
acronym for some student organization in
Berkeley. When I come up and speak, there's 35
people in their group, I said, I'd love to come up
and speak. I thought that was really neat. First
time I'd been invited to speak, I'd never spoken on
this subject. Here I am, on my way to jail, I get in
touch with Mikkel John, who lives in Berkeley, and
we go together. We walk through Sathergate, and
there are thousands of people. I'm still looking
for a room number where 35 students are going to
hear me. A television camera is put in my face and
asks what I have to say, and I find out that the
meeting had been moved to Wheeler Auditorium, and
then they piped it into two more auditoriums, and
then everything from Wheeler down to Sathergate,
with loudspeakers, there was 5,000 people out
there to hear me. Humor about this. With Mikkel
John with me, he's then 89,
he weighed about 89 pounds, and I don't have any
notes, or know nothing. I hear him speak before
5,000 people. So I turned to him, I said, Alec, I'll
introduce you, and you tell them about your
Hennings essay. That's what sent me to jail. He
said, oh no, Frank, this is your day, or something
like that. I wanted like a hole in the head. So we're
going, walking up to this huge crowd of people,
everybody's staring at us, to Wheeler
Auditorium. We're going backstage, and Mikkel
John was trying to tell me what to say. And you've
got a picture of him. He's just a tiny little
diminutive man. He said, Frank, tell him about
Thoreau and Emerson. Well,
I'd never read Thoreau and Emerson. He didn't know
it until that moment. So he proceeds to tell me the
anecdote about Thoreau being in jail, and Emerson
coming to visit him, saying, what are you doing in
there? Henry, and Thoreau says, what are you doing
out there, Ralph? You know the story? Crazy. And I
said, oh, Alec. And he said, you didn't know that I
said, no, I, sorry, Alec. He said, well, you get up
there and make the best speech you can. And once
you're in prison, I'll send you the books so you
know why you're in there. The moment I hit Atlanta,
he started me out on Plato He gave me a reading
regimen, and it was so exhausting that I thought
I'd never finish it. I was still in Milton,
Paradise Lost, and Areopagitica after three
months struggling. And I kept saying, when do we
get the Constitution? He said, never mind, it'll
come. Anyway, I learned why I was in prison by
reading while I was in prison on Micklejohn's
thing. But better get back to the FBI. And did you
learn why the crowd was that large at Berkeley?
That is only what I've just learned two years ago.
We now have the FBI documents. This is the moment
that the people from SCOPE, or whatever it was, had
called me. The FBI went to Clark Kerr, the
president. Was this about 1960? One. Yeah, okay, I
know that group that you're talking about.
Michael Tiger was one of them. He's a lawyer in
Washington now. He clerked for William O.
Douglas. Bright kids. Anyway, we now have the
documents where the FBI, under Hoover's orders,
when he hears I'm picking up there, goes to Clark
Kerr to get me cancelled. Tells him to cancel the
meeting. And Clark Kerr hands it over to a deputy
administrator and deputy president of the
university. And the president writes back to
Hoover saying, we cannot cancel this. It's a
legitimate student organization. And Hoover
insists that they do. And Clark Kerr tells, tell
Hoover that we'll pay his way here to speak and
debate Wilkinson or come before or afterwards to
speak on behalf of the FBI. and it comes back, and
Hoover sees that memorandum of Clark Kerr and
writes across the face of it. Absolutely not. I
never trusted that Clark Kerr, that, what do you
call him, those liberals, those poly-liberals,
or some word. It's in the handwriting. I never
trusted Clark Kerr and those others, and his
deputy is another one. So when they couldn't do
that to them, then they went to a fundamentalist
group called the Baptist Fundamentalists in the
Bay Area, connected with the 20th Century
Reformation Hour. And they come to the university
to get me canceled. And Clark Kerr turns them down.
Then they get a caravan of 125 cars. And they leave
the Berkeley campus with signs plastered all over
the cars, Stop Communist Convict Wilkinson from
speaking. And they go 125 miles to Sacramento and
go around the state capitol and go in to see
Governor Brown Sr. And Governor Brown upholds my
right to speak. No one told me anything about this
until I arrived with Mikkel John and finally there
was a crowd. So then they come back and they go round
and round and round the campus. And by the time I
arrived, The FBI, through this fundamentalist
right group, had attracted so much attention that
5,000 people turned out to see my horns.
One would think that with all the money and men of
the FBI They could be more efficient.
Well, you know, I've spoken... As a free society,
though, and you just... I spoke at this wonderful
conference on the right of dissent at Harvard Law
School last Saturday. And my topic was the
statutory basis of repression. In preparing for
that, I went back through this whole life of mine
You know, I'm a case. It's Wilkinson versus U.S.
Now there's another case, Wilkinson v. FBI. And I
went back to those hearings in Georgia in 56, 58.
And I find out we'd agreed with the ACLU, all I would
do was to, they
ask your name and address. You give my name, but not
my address. My name is Frank Wilkinson. Your
address, please. On the base of the First
Amendment, I refuse to answer this question or any
other question of your committee. At that point,
Richard Ahrens, the fundamentalist right-wing
general counsel of the UAC, puts in two and a half
pages of the congressional record where the
contempt citation was voted, laying a
legislative framework for having brought the
question to me. It is not a witch hunt, because I'm
down there trying to keep HUAC from putting the red
label on Martin King. It is entirely that we are
investigating oversight regarding the recent
court decisions affecting the Internal Security
Act of 1950, Title I, Title II, the Voorhees Act,
the Smith Act, etc. They were all checking those
laws out, and therefore they had to ask questions
in order to advise Congress on how to improve the
laws. Every bit of it was done with a statutory
basis. But you get the FBI files on me. There were 12
separate prosecutive summaries sent by Hoover to
the Justice Department to prosecute me. Never
just I mean, I would say that he hated my
integration work, and he didn't like my work to
abolish the Inter-American Identities
Committee. And so it's a personal vendetta on an
individual. And
when you get these prosecuting summaries, which I
have, there are six of them in that pile of papers
you have right there. Under the FOIA, you get these
documents. In every case, it's not just a wild...
accusation against me they claimed that under the
fbi's responsibility to enforce the federal
criminal statutes namely smith act the police act
security act county's control act we have
investigated mr wilkins and we find that he is
guilty of so-and-so they provide what all the
agents that were following me at that time turn in
all their stuff Hoover puts it into one three-page
summary and turns it over for prosecution for my
violating one of the acts. It's very important to
know it's done that way. And then each of these was
rejected. Twelve separate attorneys general,
both Republican and Democrat, write back to
Hoover saying the evidence you have submitted
shows no indication of violation of federal
criminal statutes on the part of Mr. Wilkinson. I
throw this out to you because now we're building up
a similar legislative history regarding the use
of the word terrorism, and that's really the
argument that I was making in Harvard. Because
these witch hunts, these inquisitorial
committees, these repressive laws
are all done by men and women who maintain the
pretense that we're a system, a government of
laws. Yeah. It isn't just like, go get them, go
smear them, go get Martin Luther King's sex life,
go cop them. They always give you a legislative
basis for doing what they're doing. And now that
those laws have been declared either
unconstitutional or unenforceable, which all of
them have been. When they get around to 1981,
five years after HUAC is abolished and Strom
Thurmond revives HUAC in the Senate Judiciary
Subcommittee, they find that there is no
statutory basis that's solid enough in the word
communism or certainly the word un-American,
which doesn't even fly anymore. So it's called the
Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Terrorism. And
when Hoover
dies in 72, and Gerald Ford knocks out the
FBI's quintile probe on political surveillance,
and begins to turn the FBI around to a federal
bureau of criminal investigation. It was his
attorney general, Levy,
under Ford, that gives us the protections. But in
1983,
William Fred Smith, attorney general under
Reagan, now Meese, writes new guidelines that
overturns Gerald Ford's guidelines. I think it's
important. that it's a Republican today who's
turning the clock back on a good Republican we had
in 1976. And Reagan's new guidelines state that
the FBI shall investigate all violations of
federal criminal law, which is where they should
stop. Nothing more, except maybe to repeal what we
call the speech crimes. But get rid of the speech
crimes and enforce the law. That's what the FBI
should do. But then he doesn't. That is point A. B,
the FBI shall investigate all terrorist
enterprises. And that is the basis of what Mies is
doing in infiltrating the church movement, the
sanctuary, the Central America Peace Movement,
and so on. The only thing I want to add for this
record, and I did it not in Texas, where it might be
popular, but I did it in Massachusetts in... Ted
Kennedy's home district, a block away from the
Kennedy School of Government. The guidelines
that Ronald Reagan and William Brent Smith
formalized in March of 1983 were copied after an
original draft, which was never approved, done by
Jimmy Carter in 1979 under his attorney general,
Ben Civilletti, And the Carter Charter was
written by and introduced by Senator Ted Kennedy.
It was the liberals, Kennedy, Carter,
Civilletti, that first came up with this loose
word, terrorist enterprise, which goes to the
heart of political dissent. It is undefined. I
mean, we have all the laws we need for the FBI to stop
terrorism. dynamiting, possession,
kidnapping, hijacking. Those were all the books.
Let the FBI enforce the law. That's what is needed.
The church committee, late Senator Frank Church,
committee report, which is so valuable, sort of
the bible of the abuse of power by J. Edgar Hoover.
They brought out the fact that in Chicago, from
1966 to
The FBI had 1,012 informants,
political informants, on political
surveillance in Chicago. They spent $2,500,000
paying those informants. During that period of
time, there were over 1,000 gangland murders in
Chicago that were never caught by the FBI. in New
York at the same time. There was one period in New
York where the FBI had 404
agents on the communist detail, and only four on
organized crime. This is fact. This is out of
congressional? Church Valley Report. Okay. Very
basic. Incredible. The American Bar Association
which, you know, is the respectable bar unit, you
know, the officers of the court in our old system,
did a critique of William French Smith's
guidelines in 1983. And they asked correctly, why
the need for this special focus on terrorism? Why
does there need to be a special but why not just the
federal criminal statutes? And they invite Judge
Webster, the current director of the FBI, to come
before the ABA and to tell them, what is the need for
this? Do you need extra money to fight terrorism?
And what is the empirical data to support such a
concentration drive on domestic terrorism? And
Judge Webster tells the ABA, this is a better
public record, I do not need any more money to fight
terrorism. Terrorism is a low priority. In 1981
there were, these are very close to exact, in 1981
there were 51 terrorist cases in the United
States. In 1982 there were 40. In 1983, 31. In 1984,
5. Well, there's no basis for it. It's a guise for
silencing dissent. The international terrorist
problem is being exploited by Reagan and by
expedients, by Carter and Kennedy, as a means of
rationalizing some control on dissent in this
country. And, you know, I give this to you
hurriedly in my capsule, but I've prepared very
carefully for my lecture here. I'm dealing with
300 of the brightest young law students in the
country last Saturday. And I look at them, they're
all, you know, under 25. They don't know these
things. I know it. So I went back and pulled out the
statutory, the legislative history to show how
their generation is going to be impacted by these
Reagan guidelines unless they get involved in
civil liberties work and fight for the right to
dissent. I have another question, and that is,
that deals with the relationship between you and
your organization, National Committee to
Abolish HUAC, And the other one that you repeat, I
don't get the question. I have another question.
And that is the relationship between the National
Committee to Abolish HUAC and then Carl and the
movement, the anti-war movement, the women's
liberation movement, the civil rights movement,
what's basically called the movement in the
1960s. What kinds of roles I know that you were
working still very diligently to abolish HUAC
during that time, but what else did you, and did you
join in? What kind of relations did you have with
the anti-war movement, the student movement,
etc.? It's a very, very thoughtful question,
because much of those movements in the 60s had an
element that was anti-
the word, not legislative politics, but
electoral politics. Anti-electoral politics.
My own kids, for example, dropped out of Cal and San
Francisco State to become trade unions. The
academic world was not real. And many, many people
were turned off by electoral politics. The idea of
lobbying to influence a member of Congress to stop
the Vietnam War, or in our case, to abolish UAC,
it's like we're hopelessly naïve people who don't
know what's going on. Yeah. We held our, N. Carl's
strength has been focused. Our strength is the
fact that we're absolutist on principle. We do not
deviate
a bit in regard to the political content of the Bill
of Rights. We do not, as many people say, well, you
know, all speech is all right except maybe a little
bit, we ought to do something about the Nazis or the
plan. We don't ever get near that. On wiretapping,
where Ted Kennedy came up with a wiretapping bill a
couple years ago, we fought it. All right, that's
one thing. The second thing is, that we focus. We
take the most imminent and dangerous issue for
civil liberties at any one time, and then we focus.
We don't try to cover the whole field. Now, during
the 60s, we always have argued that civil
liberties are indivisible to peace. Civil
liberties are indivisible to civil rights, or
whatever the movements are. During the civil
rights struggles, Ann Braden, N. Carl officer,
wrote our booklet called HUAC, Bulwark of
Segregation, in which we brought together the
civil rights movement and civil liberties. Today
on our board of officers, we have John Lewis, the
first president of SNCC, Julian Bond, the PR guy in
SNCC, now a senator in Georgia, C.T. Vivian, who
was director of affiliates for Martin Luther
King. They're all our officers because we related
the civil rights struggles with civil liberties.
And Martin King's statement the night we went to
jail is the classic. On the peace movement, always
the same, but we had to do an awful lot of education.
In 1962, right after I got out of prison, I came back
to Los Angeles. And you
held a hearing against students at three of our
colleges, some student peace activity or I don't
know what it was. Yeah. We had done such an
organizing job among students that when the
hearing was held, we had the long-standing
federal building surrounded on four sides that
makes 20 story building, four of us were students
going around there. Beautiful demonstration,
something you never saw during the silent
fifties. It came by 62. It began in 1960
when we had the first demonstration. I'm actually
accused of organizing the so-called riot at San
Francisco City Hall where the students were
washed down the stairs of the city hall. That's
when it began, after Carol Chessman, and after the
Greensboro Civil Rights guy. I trace all of the
development of the student movements to the
Greensboro black students who fought for the
World Restoration. I think that's where it began.
But by 1962, they're there. Now, that morning,
I've been working for years with a group starting
about 1960. called Women Strike for Peace, headed
up by Dagmar Wilson. They were fighting Kennedy at
that point for his bomb test in the Pacific, and
getting nowhere with it. And so they had decided,
as a tactic, that if anyone should read in the
papers that Kennedy had dropped another bomb in
South Pacific, I mean a test of a bomb in the South
Pacific, that without any further word, All 100
members of WISP, Women's Strike for Peace, would
come to the federal building. They'd wear white
dresses, and they'd carry a red rose or a yellow
rose, something like that, and do a vigil against
Kennedy. The night before the U.S. hearings
began, Kennedy dropped a bomb, passed a bomb. The
next morning, promptly at 9 o'clock, from all over
the city, without even a phone call, are 100 women
in white dresses, with little red roses to
protest. They get down there, and they can't get
near the Federal Building because the students
are four abreast all around it. They don't know the
students. They do know me. So they call me, come
across the street to them, and they said, Frank,
Kennedy has tested another bomb. We're down here
to do a vigil. Could you ask the students to make
some room so we can do a vigil in front of the Federal
Building there against Kennedy?" And I turned and
said, look at that. How can you, how can you do that?
There's no place you can, the building, the
headline of the day said, HUAC used a freight
elevator. You can get in the building. They had to
use a freight elevator to get into the building. I
said, come on over and join them. And they said, no,
that would confuse the issues between HUAC and the
Kennedy bomb testing. We cannot confuse the
issues. That was April of 62. On December the 6th of
62, I got a phone call from Dagmar Wilson in
Washington saying, HUAC has just subpoenaed the
entire leadership of Women's Strike for Peace,
will you come back and help us?" And I went back to
help. They didn't need any help. They did the most
magnificent opposition I'd ever seen, where all
these women go into a U.I. hearing, bring their
babies with unchanged diapers, and put all the
women in the front row, and when the first witness
is called, by signal, every woman change his dirty
diapers in front of UX. Stench was greater than UX.
But, this is your question. Yeah. Closed
Captioning by Kris Brandhagen. brandhagen.com